Section 1: General

1.00 School Meeting rules in effect all the time
All School Meeting rules (except where noted) are in effect in the Three Rivers Village School building
and on the school grounds, 24 hours per day, 7 days per week, and unless otherwise noted, all rules are in effect on field trips and at all school sponsored functions held on or off the school grounds, including rules that make reference to “school,” “at school,” “on school premises,” and similar expressions. Generally the school’s jurisdiction shall be extended to travel by school bus, on foot, and other means except private automobiles, although the school may extend its Justice reach in special circumstances.

1.01 Individual obligation to promote school welfare
All School Meeting members are responsible for the running of the school community. It is the individual obligation of each School Meeting member to help promote the general welfare of the school, through actions that contribute to maintaining the air of freedom, respect, fairness, trust, and order that is the essence of the school's existence.

1.02 Jeopardizing the well?being of the school prohibited
Each person is expected to refrain from behaviors which jeopardize the well?being of the school.

1.03 Field Trip Policy

1. Definition of a field trip. A field trip is any occasion on which one or more students travel off the school’s premises during school hours or under the school’s care. A field trip may be initiated by a student or staff pursuing a personal interest, or by a student or staff member pursuing school business.
2. Compliance responsibility. Each participant in a field trip is individually responsible for compliance with field trip policy and procedures, and all participants in a field trip are collectively responsible for compliance.
3. Prohibited field trip activities.
4. Field trip participants shall not engage in illegal acts.
5. Field trip participants shall not violate school rules or policies.
6. Field trips shall not be for the purpose of a staff member running a personal errand, nor a parent and child running a family errand.
7. Definition of “Quickie Field Trip”. A “Quickie Field Trip” shall be defined as travel by private automobile, including only students and adult representatives of the school, to a public or commercial destination within the greater of forty (40) miles or one hour’s travel from the school, with departure and return both during school hours. Quickie Field Trips may include momentary stops at private destinations only for very brief errands such as a pick-up or drop-off.
8. Definition of “Walking Field Trip”. A “Walking Field Trip” shall be defined as an excursion on foot of less than four hours duration during school hours, including only students and adult representatives of the school, to a public or commercial destination within a radius of a mile and a half of the school, but not crossing the Allegheny River. Walking Field Trips shall be confined to streets with sidewalks and non-thoroughfare residential streets without sidewalks. Walking Field Trips may include momentary stops at private destinations only for very brief errands such as a pick-up or drop-off. Walking Field Trips shall be regulated exactly as Quickie Field Trips unless otherwise noted, except that the adult presence requirement shall be relaxed to allow up to six students to attend with one staff member.
9. Definition of “Special Field Trip”. A “Special Field Trip”, requiring special approvals, shall be defined as any field trip that is not a Quickie Field Trip or a Walking Field Trip.
10. Parental consent. Every field trip of every type requires the advance written consent of a legal guardian of every participating student. No student may attend any field trip without the consent of their legal guardian in writing in advance. Written consents shall be submitted to the Attendance Clerk prior to departure. For Quickie Field Trips and Walking Field Trips, the advance written consent requirement shall be deemed satisfied for students for whom the school has on file a Permission and Waiver Of Liability For Student To Participate In Local Field Trips that has been executed by the current legal guardian. For all other field trips, written consent shall be specific to the field trip and shall be in a form approved by the Attendance Clerk.
11. Field trip approvals. Quickie Field Trips and Walking Field Trips do not require the advance approval of the School Meeting. Each and every Special Field Trip requires the advance written approval of the School Meeting, such approval to be requested by the organizers of the trip after development of proposed trip rules and conditions.
12. Visiting minors. Visiting students (regardless of the purpose and duration of the visit), and all other persons who are less than 21 years old and not enrolled, shall not participate in field trips without specific permission of the School Meeting and specific written consent of the legal guardian.
13. Adult representatives of the school. For purposes of this policy, the term “adult” shall mean a person who is at least 19 years of age at the time of the field trip. An “adult representative of the school” (or just “adult representative”) shall meet all of the following conditions:
a. Shall be an adult parent or legal guardian of an enrolled student; or a staff member of the school; or another adult designated by the School Meeting.
b. Shall have on file at school the results of the same background checks required of substitute staff.
c. Shall be certified by the Attendance Clerk as an adult representative of the school, such certification subject to revocation at any time, with or without cause.
14. Student/adult ratio. Every field trip shall be attended by at least one staff member. Any field trip that includes four or more students shall be attended by at least one staff member and one other adult representative, except that a Walking Field Trip may include up to six students with one staff member. The ratio of students to adults on any field trip shall not exceed seven to one. The School Meeting may grant exceptions to the ratio requirements of this paragraph for certain field trips and/or certain destinations, when it is reasonably anticipated that there will be additional adults present at the destination, who will be available for immediate assistance if needed.
15. Other adults. Adults who do not qualify as “adult representatives of the school” may attend field trips, but shall not be counted towards the ratio of students to adults, and shall not be present with students except when an adult representative of the school is also present. (Note that the presence of other adults changes a “Quickie Field Trip” to a “Special Field Trip”.)
16. Certification. No student or adult representative may attend a field trip without first being certified by the Attendance Clerk for that school year. To become certified as a field trip participant, a person must demonstrate to the Attendance Clerk satisfactory knowledge and understanding of field trip regulation. The Attendance Clerk shall prescribe certification procedures, and may revoke certification at any time.
17. Field trip expenses. Unless otherwise provided by the School Meeting, field trip participants shall bear all expenses associated with their field trip, including but not limited to mileage reimbursement and extra staffing expense. Mileage reimbursement shall be at the rate established by the IRS for medical and moving purposes. The organizers of a trip shall be responsible for collection of monies from participants in advance of each trip, and for disbursement of funds collected. Staff members who are essential to a trip may be excused from sharing in expenses by the School Meeting. Neither the school nor individuals shall disburse or commit funds for field trip expenses in advance of actual collection of funds. Individuals who violate this policy by committing or disbursing personal funds on behalf of a field trip in advance of actual collection of funds shall be deemed to have waived their right to collect. The school shall not be liable for debts incurred by field trip planners and participants individually or collectively, and field trip planners and participants agree, by planning, attending, or signing up for a field trip, to waive any and all rights to make monetary claims against the school arising from field trips, and further agree to be collectively responsible for all field trip expenses and individually responsible for a pro rata share of the total of all expenses.
18. Staff coverage at school. Field trip participants shall ensure that staff coverage will be maintained at school during the field trip, to the satisfaction of the Attendance Clerk. As provided elsewhere in this policy, field trip participants shall bear the expense of extra staffing during a field trip, unless otherwise provided by the School Meeting.
19. Emergency information. An emergency contacts list and all participants’ Medical Consent forms shall be taken on every field trip, and copies shall be carried in each automobile in which students are transported, or with each group of students transported by another mode. Only students with Medical Consent forms and emergency contact information may attend field trips.
20. Cell Phones. A designated cell phone shall be taken on every trip and shall remain available and attended to the maximum extent practical. Trips involving more than one vehicle or group shall have a designated cell phone with each vehicle or group.
21. Drivers and cars. Private automobiles used to transport students during a field trip shall be driven only by adults approved by the Attendance Clerk who have read, signed, and dated a copy of this policy prior to driving on a field trip for their first time in each school year. Signed copies of this policy shall be kept on file by the Attendance Clerk, along with a copy of each driver’s license, plus car registration and proof of insurance for any car in which students are transported.
22. Seat belts, car seats, booster seats. When transportation is provided by automobile, each and every field trip participant, regardless of age and seating arrangements, shall wear an individual seat belt or be secured in a car seat or booster seat as required by state law. At this writing, Act 229 requires federally approved car seats for children under 4 years old, and federally approved booster seats for children at least 4 years old and less than 8 years old, each secured by a seat belt or LATCH system.
23. First Aid Kit. A first aid kit approved by the Safety Clerk shall be taken on every field trip and in each vehicle.
24. Medications. Prescription and non-prescription medicines may be taken on the trip if required for certain individuals, and shall be stored in the first aid kit in their original containers, labeled with the name of the individual. For each medicine, a corresponding Medication Plan, Parent Request, and Waiver of Liability form shall also be stored in the first aid kit. During a trip, students shall take medicine only with the assistance of an adult representative of the school.
25. Information left at school. Prior to departure the following legibly written information shall be posted on the main bulletin board: names of all persons on the field trip; destination(s); date and time of departure; expected date and time of return to school; current date; phone numbers of all designated cell phones, indicated as such; phone numbers of all other cell phones taken on the trip.
26. Supervision. For reasons of safety, students’ customary freedoms are limited on field trips. Adult representatives are “dictators” and may impose rules and restrictions in their sole discretion for safety and convenience. Students shall cooperate fully with adult representatives, complying with all imposed rules and restrictions, and obeying orders immediately and without question. The level of adult supervision shall be appropriate to the circumstances, with reasonable considerat
27. ion for such factors as the abilities of students, degree of familiarity with surroundings, ambient hazards, and more. For example, in most public and commercial settings, students and adults shall remain within sight of one another at all times except for brief periods necessitated by circumstances.
28. Pre-trip meeting. Before departing on a trip, participants shall conduct a preparatory meeting, with all participants in attendance, for the purpose of establishing ground rules for the trip and to determine how the field trip policies and school rules apply to this trip. 
1.04 Bus Rules Policy
School rules apply while riding the bus to and from school.
1.05 Off-Campus Student Walk Policy
The Off-Campus Walking Policy defines the requirements and restrictions for a group of 3 to 5 students to walk to any of the designated locations below without the attendance of staff, volunteer, or intern. 
Requirements: 
In order for a group of 3 to 5 students to go on an Off-Campus Student Walk:
1. Each student must have his/her legal guardian sign the Off-Campus Student Walk Waiver, which expresses that the student is allowed to leave campus without the attendance of a staff member, volunteer, or intern.
2. Two students must be of or above the age of 10 years-old; and one of those two students must be of or above the age of 12 years-old. 
3. One of the students must have a reliable, charged cell phone on their body at all times in order to contact the school in case of an emergency. 
4. One of the students must have a reliable source for keeping track of the time, including but not limited to, a wrist watch or a charged cell phone. 
5. All students in the group must get the approval of the Attendance Clerk in order to leave. 
6. All students in the group can be gone from the school’s property for no longer than 2 hours on any given Off-Campus Student Walk. 
7. Every student in the group must fill out a field trip sign-out sheet and post it on the bulletin board before leaving the school. 
8. The destinations for the Off-Campus Student Walk will be limited to the following locations:
a) Charles F. Dinan Memorial Playground
b) Rite Aid in Morningside 
c) Fire Station on Stanton Ave.
d) Community garden on Stanton Ave.
e) Post Office mailbox
f) Union Project on Stanton Ave.
g) Heather Shannon’s Farm School
Section 2: Safety

2.00 Personal safety
It is prohibited to engage in activities that present a real or potential danger to anyone’s personal safety.

2.01 All expected to intervene in unsafe behavior
Any School Meeting member is expected to intervene up to and including physical intervention, to stop any behavior that he or she believes is imminently dangerous.

2.02 No fire allowed
There may not be any fires or use of matches, lighters, or other fire creating tools, except by special permission of the School Meeting. 

2.03 Fire drill protocol
If you hear a fire drill or if an adult calls one, you must comply with the fire drill procedure.

2.04 Weapons prohibited
It is unlawful to bring to school, or to possess at school, any firearm, knife, or other weapon. 

The term "knife" shall include pocket knives, hunting knives, war relic knives, antique knives, sharp kitchen knives, and all other knives which are not explicitly excluded. Excluded from this law are intentionally dull?bladed knives, such as a butter knife, when such knife is used for its intended purpose. Knives controlled by the Art Coop and Kitchen Coop are not subject to this rule, nor are the Building Clerk’s tools.  

The term "weapon" shall include guns, BB guns, knives, spears, blades, bows, and other instruments with significant potential to cause injury. Excluded from this law are instruments whose purpose is completely unrelated to causing injury, and which are at school for specific lawful activities which require such instruments, and which are being used at school only for their intended purpose. Also excluded from this law are toys which simulate potential to cause injury but which do not possess actual potential to cause injury.

When violation of this law is alleged, the School Meeting and/or the Justice Committee shall process the complaint as soon as possible, not waiting for the next scheduled meetings of the School Meeting or Justice Committee.

2.05 Medication at school
If you bring medications to school you must, immediately upon arrival, turn them over to the Safety Clerk for secure keeping and supervision of access. You may not carry medications with you, or store medications at school, unless you have special permission from the Safety Clerk, which may be granted case?by?case in the Safety Clerk's discretion. "Medications" refers to the following: (a) drugs and medicines both oral and
topical; (b) vitamins and supplements whose original packaging identifies an active ingredient or bear the legend “Keep out of reach of children”. "Medications" does not include sunscreen, non?prescription lotions, and non?prescription cough drops.

2.06 Send strangers to the office
If you encounter or see an unknown and unaccompanied person on campus, you must direct them to the school office or notify a School Meeting official of their presence.

2.07 Running in the School Building
Safe, reasonable, and prudent running is allowed. Running is never allowed in staircases, hallways, and upstairs. 

2.08 No being on tables
No being on tables. Removed 5/7/13 Reinstated 5/14/2014

2.09 Care of Children under the age of 5 years-old
Students can’t pick up or carry people under the age of 5 years-old without certification by a staff member.

2.10 Projectiles are prohibited
Projectiles are prohibited in the building, with the follow exceptions: 
* The Safety Clerk has allowed it. 
* Soft projectiles (pillows, beech balls, cardboard etc) are allowed in the basement only.	

2.11 Wash Your Hands
You must wash your hands after each time you use the bathroom. 

2.12 Wheeled Vehicles in the Building
Wheeled vehicles may be used with written parent consent and approval from the safety clerk. No one may wear roller blades or roller skates while going up or down stairs. No one shall wear rollerblades or roller skates in the kitchen. No one shall roller skate, roller blade, or skateboard in a room unless the floor is clear of tables, chairs, and other obstacles. When not in use, roller skates or roller blades must be stored in a cubby or against a wall and away from staircases.

2.13 No Chair Tipping
No tipping your chair while you are sitting in it. 

2.14 Roughhousing Indoors
No one is allowed to roughhouse in the red room or upstairs at any time, including wrestling around other students or near any obstacles, stairs, or in small areas.

2.15 Snowball Fights
You must ask someone if they would like to be part of a snowball fight before you throw a snowball at them. No purposeful throwing snowballs at other peoples’ faces. If someone wants to leave a snowball fight, they announce, “I’M OUT!”

2.16 No Being on Media Landing Railing 
No one can be on the railing in the Media Landing.

2.17 No Throwing Objects into Neighbors’ Yards
No one is allowed to throw anything into the neighbors’ yards. 

2.18 No Traveling Between the Tree and the Stairs
You may not travel between the peach tree and the exterior stairs in the backyard. 
Section 3: Conduct

3.00 Sexual harassment prohibited
Sexual harassment is prohibited. Sexual harassment is unwanted or unwelcome behavior of a sexual nature that would likely make a reasonable person feel uncomfortable or intimidated. Sexual harassment can take place in a single severe incident or in a series of less severe incidents. In determining whether sexual harassment has occurred, the following factors, when applicable, shall be taken into account:
• The power dynamic between the alleged harasser and the alleged harassee. Sexual behavior is more often harassing when the alleged harasser is older, larger, has a higher social standing, or is in a position of authority.
• The context of the behavior.
• The history of the relationship between the alleged harasser and the alleged harassee.
• The intent of the alleged harasser. Intent is not necessary in all instances of sexual harassment, but intentional harassment shall generally be deemed more severe than unintentional harassment
• Whether the alleged harasser has been asked to stop the behavior, either by the alleged harassee or by a third party. Although this is a factor, the alleged harasser does not need to have been asked to stop in order for the behavior to be considered sexual harassment. Conversely, a behavior is not necessarily sexual harassment simply because the alleged harasser has been asked to stop.
• The effect on the alleged harassee. The fact that an action is experienced as sexual harassment does not necessarily mean sexual harassment has occurred, nor does the lack of effect necessarily mean sexual harassment has not occurred.
Examples of behavior that may constitute sexual harassment include but are not limited to:
• Sexual advances
• Propositions or pressure for sexual favors
• Repeatedly asking someone out
• Suggestive staring or leering
• Compliments or comments about a person’s body, clothing or looks
• Asking questions, making comments, joking, or spreading rumors about someone’s sexuality or sexual practices
• Display of pornographic materials or sexually suggestive pictures, cartoons, movies, games
• Telling sexual jokes or stories
• Obscene gestures, touching oneself sexually
• Touching or grabbing someone else
• Invading personal space, blocking someone’s path, following them around
• Calling someone demeaning or sexually explicit names
• Indecent exposure

3.01 Illegal acts prohibited
Members shall not commit illegal acts on school premises, nor during field trips, nor during other school?sponsored events. "Illegal acts" refers to actions that are prohibited by local, state, and federal laws and regulations. 

3.02 Obstruction of officials in pursuit of business prohibited
No member shall willfully and knowingly obstruct or fail to cooperate with a School Meeting clerk or committee in the performance of their duties.

3.03 Community norms must be observed during off?campus events
No one may engage in behavior during an off campus TRVS event that violates the accepted norms of the community in which the event takes place.

3.04 Tobacco use prohibited
The use of tobacco in any form anywhere on the school premises is prohibited.

3.05 No controlled substances
No one shall attend school under the influence of, or have in their possession, alcohol or any other controlled substance.

3.06 Cruelty to animals prohibited
Cruelty to and/or abuse of animals is prohibited.

3.07 Hostile physical aggression prohibited
Hostile physical aggression (hitting, kicking, biting, pushing, etc.) is prohibited.

3.08 Acts of violence prohibited
Acts of violence are prohibited. An act of violence is any deliberate act, serving no legitimate purpose, which causes significant injury or which could reasonably be expected to cause significant injury to self or another person. The use of excessive force in response to another’s actions shall be deemed an act of violence, whether or not the provoking action is deemed to be an act of violence.

3.09 Private property
Respect other people's private property. No one may use or abuse another person's property at school without permission of the owner.

3.10 Stealing prohibited
Stealing is prohibited. Taking items from a person’s hands is considered stealing. 

3.11 Verbal assault prohibited
Verbal assault is prohibited. Generally, verbal assault is unprovoked or unwarranted spoken speech that is loud, violent, hostile, attacking, threatening, profane, antagonistic, intimidating, or any combination of these. Generally, the more of these elements that are present, the more severe the assault. However, any one element alone or in combination with others may constitute verbal assault. 

3.12 Harassment prohibited
It is unlawful to harass a School Meeting member (or visitor or guest). "Harassment" may include but is not limited to any or all of the following acts: malicious pranks, physical or verbal assaults, malicious gossip, pattern of deliberate annoyance, pattern of unwanted pestering, false or unwarranted JC complaints.

3.13 Bullying prohibited
Bullying is prohibited. Bullying is defined as repeated, aggressive behavior intended to hurt another person, physically or mentally. Bullying is characterized by an individual behaving in a certain way to gain power over another person. Observing bullying and taking no corrective action is considered a form of bullying. Corrective actions may include but are not limited to writing a complaint, telling the bullier to stop, reporting the bullying to someone outside the bullier’s peer group, physically intervening, or going for help.

3.14 Excessive vulgarity prohibited
Excessive vulgarity is prohibited. “Vulgarity” is language, behavior, and other forms of expression that are crude, indecent, profane, scatological, obscene, or otherwise violate the norms of decency of the school community and the general community beyond the school. Vulgarity is “excessive” if any one or more of the following conditions is met:
• Unwilling observers are subjected to it;
• It is loud enough to be heard in other rooms or at considerable distance;
• It occurs in a public or high?traffic area, whether actually overheard or not;
• It occurs in the presence of observers who are significantly less developmentally mature
       than the perpetrator;
• It occurs during a session of the School Meeting, the Judicial Committee, a trial, or any
       other official proceeding of the School Meeting or its agencies;
• It occurs on a field trip or at a special school event, whether overheard or not;
• The school receives one or more complaints from another building tenant, from a parent,
or from a visitor or guest.
It is intended that this law shall apply with equal force to single severe incidents of excessive vulgarity, and also to patterns and repeated incidents of mildly excessive vulgarity.

It is not the intent of this law to prohibit swearing. For example, the use of casual swearing in private settings in private conversations among willing participants does not constitute excessive vulgarity as this law means it. The use of profanity in ways that would not generally offend a reasonable person in the community also does not constitute excessive vulgarity. Swearing loudly with hostility and aggression in a public or high?traffic area does
constitute excessive vulgarity, whether or not the behavior was actually heard or seen by an offended party. 

The right to freedom from vulgarity shall prevail over the right to express vulgarity.

3.15 “Stop” Rule
If someone asks you to stop, you must stop what you are doing and ask, “Stop what?” If you are interfering with what somebody is doing, you must stop what you are doing. If you do not hear the person say “stop”, you are still in violation of this rule if you do not stop.

3.16 Loud Noises in the Building
No screaming, yelling, or making other annoyingly loud noises in the building.

3.17 No peeing on toilet seats
No peeing on toilet seats

3.18 Stick Play
No playing with sticks that are taller than you. If you are playing with sticks, they must be at least 2 feet from other people at all times.

3.19 Other’s Activities
No one may knowingly or negligently disrupt people's activities.

3.20 Council Meeting Conduct
You cannot complain about Council Meeting during a council meeting. 

3.21 Play Hitting
You have to ask if you can hit someone with anything with innocent force during a game before hitting them.

3.22 Slamming Doors
No one may use excessive force when closing a door. 

3.23 School Event Conduct
No running, jogging, skating, or roughhousing during school events held at school.

3.24 Honesty with J.C. during School Meeting
You must be honest in School Meeting when Justice Committee cases are being heard. 

3.25 Public Display of Affection/ Intimate Contact
No inappropriate sexual behavior or contact at school.  Generally, a sexual behavior is inappropriate if such behavior is likely to lead to discomfort on the part of an unintentional observer who is a member of the school community or a member of the larger community in which the school is situated. 

Spoken speech that is explicitly or graphically sexual in content is appropriate among willing participants in private conversations in low traffic locations at school. 

This rule shall apply at school and during school sponsored trips and other events.
Section 4: Arrival/Dismissal, Attendance and Visitors

4.00 Leaving school 
School Meeting members shall remain on school premises between the time of their arrival and the time of their departure for the day, except on errands with a parent and as explicitly permitted elsewhere (such as for field trips, and staff members on school business).  The Attendance Clerk may grant exceptions (such as for supervised internships).
 
There are three options for students to leave school: (1) Ride a school bus, (2) Be picked up by a designated adult, and (3) Leave school alone, whether walking, biking, driving, etc. Each student must have on file a form from his guardian(s) specifying which options are allowed for that student, and for option #2, a list of names and relationships of adults who can pick up the student. 
 
When School Meeting Members leave school, they must say Official Goodbye to a staff member.

One-day exceptions to a student's dismissal options may be communicated by the parent in person or over the phone. 
  
4.01 Minimum average hours per day
Students are expected to attend school five days per week and, on average, for the following hours per day: ages five and under, 3.25 hours per day; ages six through thirteen, 5 hours per day; and ages fourteen and up, 5.5 hours per day. Exceptions may be granted for excused absences and reduced hours arrangements at the discretion of the Attendance Clerk.

4.02 Absences & absence explanations
Students who are absent from school are expected to account for their absence to the Attendance Clerk in writing on the day of the student’s return to school. Whenever possible, students shall notify the school prior to a planned absence or on the day of an unplanned absence. Unexcused and unlawful (under PA state law) absences are prohibited. Any unexplained absence will automatically be considered unexcused and unlawful.
The Attendance Clerk may excuse no more than ten student?explained absences per student per year, except that a few additional absences may be excused to the extent that a student’s hours of actual attendance in the school year so far exceed the minimum attendance requirement in the school year so far and the Attendance Clerk deems that the additional absences do not undermine the student’s engagement with the program and
community. If a student’s hours of actual attendance do not exceed the minimum attendance requirement, absences beyond ten may be excused with a doctor’s note that explicitly excuses school attendance for a specific amount of time, but an insufficient doctor’s note may result in a student?explained or unexcused absence. Absences beyond what the Attendance Clerk is authorized to excuse shall be considered unexcused, but will not be considered unlawful under PA state law if the student’s cumulative hours reflect no
more than the equivalent of ten absences for the year. The Attendance Clerk may excuse absences, up to the stated limits, in his or her sole discretion.  

In accordance with state law the Attendance Clerk shall notify the student’s home school district if a student accumulates three unlawful absences during the school year, or if a student’s hours reflect the equivalent of more than ten cumulative absences during the school year.

School Meeting members (or their parent/guardian) must call by 10am if they will arrive after 10:30am or leave before 1:30pm.
4.03 Communicate with your bus
Students who ride buses shall communicate with their school district transportation department regarding their plans to ride or not ride the bus from day to day, as requested or required by their school district. Unless otherwise requested by a school district, students shall notify their school district each time their daily transportation plan varies from the regular plan, such as when a student does not ride home on the bus in the
afternoon.

4.04 Bus Riders Dismissal 
All people who ride busses must be in the Red Room with their belongings packed and their shoes on and signed out at 2:50 p.m. Once signed out, they must follow the directions of the Bus Clerk.

4.05 Mandatory Announcements at School Meeting
The 10 a.m. Announcement portion of School Meeting is mandatory. 

4.06 Signing In and Out is Required
You must sign in every day when you arrive and sign out when you leave. The times you write down must match the actual times you arrived or left.

4.07 Mandatory Council Meeting
Everyone must attend Council Meetings. 

4.08 General Dismissal Conduct
When your ride comes to pick you up, you must stop what you are doing, find your things and leave without complaining. 

4.09 General Dismissal Readiness
You must be ready to go at 3pm. Your things, clothes, backpack, games, etc., all must be ready. 

4.10 Visitors Policy
Except for the following classes of individuals, any non-School-Meeting-member who wants to enter the school for an extended period of time beyond the Red Room during school hours must have prior approval of School Meeting. Exemptions: 
1. Prospective families under the supervision of the Admissions Clerk
2. Brief visits by parents for the purpose of picking up or dropping off their children
3. Contractors hired by School Meeting, Building Clerk, or the school's landlord. 
4. Media representatives as long as they are approved by the Outreach Committee Chair with at least 24 hours’ notice.
5. Alumni- All former students in good standing are invited to visit three times per school year with 24 hours’ notice given to the attendance clerk during school hours. The Attendance Clerk has the right to deny the request. Alumni visitors must have an emergency contact form completed.
6. Parent- School Meeting members may invite their parents and guardians for a “lunch hour.” “Lunch hour” visits are approximately an hour long, and can happen up to 2 times per month.  SMM must accompany their parents or guardians for the duration of the visit. They do not need pre-approval from School Meeting, but do need to inform the Attendance Clerk through email or by calling the school by the preceding day. When they arrive they must notify a staff member of their arrival and sign in. Before they leave they must sign out.


All visitors must abide by the School Rule Book and School Meeting decisions. 
Visitors may be written up in JC. 

All visitors who aren't parents and 18 or older, must either be accompanied by a staff member during their entire visit or have recent child clearances on file with the Attendance Clerk.

4.11 Good Standing/ Bad Standing Policy
One must be in good standing with the school to be on campus. There are two ways in which someone is in bad standing: If there are any outstanding cases in JC (a case that has yet to be started or finished by the end of the year) OR SM has voted, by a majority vote, to revoke good standing status. A person in bad standing may petition SM by writing a letter to SM, which will then be presented to and voted on by SM. 


Section 5: Justice Committee

5.00 Contempt: Cooperation with JC is required
It is prohibited to interfere with, disrupt, or fail to cooperate with the school’s justice processes, whether administered by the Justice Committee or School Meeting directly. Anyone found to be willingly and knowingly interfering with, disrupting, or failing to cooperate with justice processes may be found in contempt. You can be charged with contempt the day you don’t show up for J.C.,  and have a guilty plea made for you, even if you are not present and weren’t written up for it originally. Acts of contempt may include but are not limited to the following: failure to appear before the JC when called; disrespectful behavior toward agents of the JC; disruption of the JC; failure to fulfill one’s obligations as a JC member, runner or alternate; tampering with Justice complaint forms, evidence, records, or other materials; deliberate circumvention of investigative processes; deliberate circumvention of sentences.

5.01 No lying to JC
Lying is prohibited in Justice Committee testimony, in trials, and in School Meeting consideration of Justice cases (including sentencing). Lying is defined as knowingly making false statements.

5.02 No influencing JC through intimidation
No person shall influence Justice processes or other school business through intimidation, retaliation, bullying, bribery, or other coercive or corrupting methods. Members shall not use such methods to influence another to write a complaint, refrain from writing a complaint, drop a complaint, testify falsely or in any particular way, vote or not vote in any particular way on Justice or non?Justice matters (in JC or School Meeting), or take any
other actions or inactions affecting judicial, administrative, legislative, or other proceedings of school business. The influence of coercive and corrupting actions occurring off?premises or after hours is presumed to carry over to the school program, and is therefore subject to prosecution under this law.

5.03 JC Members put aside personal feelings
While serving on JC, School Meeting members put aside personal feelings and are objective while investigating complaints and discussing appropriate action. Any member unable to do so shall recuse him or herself from the case.

5.04 Follow JC sentences
All School Meeting members must follow JC sentences. Agreements reached through formal mediation sessions are as binding as JC consequences.

5.05 No impeding JC sentences
No one may intentionally impede any School Meeting member from carrying out his/her JC consequence.

5.07 No Leaving JC
When on JC you may not ask any variation of “May I leave yet?”, or ask if JC is over.
Section 6: Building and Materials 

6.00 Mess rule
Before going on to something else, clean up your previous activity. Littering or leaving messes is not allowed anywhere in the school or on the school grounds.

6.01 Group mess
When 2 or more School Meeting members share materials, it is considered a group project. All members of the group are equally responsible for putting away all project materials and debris from the project after the project/play.

6.02 Restricted areas 
Students may not enter restricted areas unless they have obtained permission from the Building Clerk, or are accompanied by a staff member. Rooms or areas that have been cordoned off with yellow caution tape are restricted. The following are restricted areas: 
* Front yard
* Stairwell that leads from the red room to the Plant Room
* Basement bathrooms
* Stairwells off of the sanctuary
* Plant Room
* Boiler room
* Any part of the roof 
* Stage drawers

The Building Clerk or the Safety Clerk can restrict access to anywhere in the school, at any time, if they determine it is necessary.

The front door (main entrance) is to be used only for arrivals, departures, and fire drills. 

6.03 Outdoor Space
All School Meeting members may go freely out of the back door of the red room to the yard. There must be a staff member accompanying students to any other part of the grounds, including the front and side yards. 
 
6.04 Lights must stay on
All carpeted rooms’ lights and all basement areas’ lights must be on at all times, except if the Building Clerk has approved the lights being off for a specific activity.

6.05 2nd floor window opening
Windows on the second floor are not to be raised higher than the window screens.

6.07 School Property
Respect the school's property. No one may damage the school's furniture and materials, or use them in such a way that is likely to lead to damage. Damaging school property may result in the offender having to replace or repair the item. No one may take school property off school grounds, except for use at school-sponsored events. Books may be removed from the school according to rules established by the Library Co-op.

6.08 Daily Chore / Chore Inspection
Each School Meeting member shall sign up for a shore upon arrival in the morning and do the chore between 2pm and 3pm. You may not lie to the chore inspectors about doing your chore.

6.09 No eating on carpeted areas
Outside the kitchen, sanctuary, and cafeteria, no one may have open containers of food or drink, with the exception of lidded containers approved by the Building Clerk. Free Eaters, as defined in the Free Eater Policy, may eat anywhere.

Free Eater Policy

Free Eaters can eat outside the kitchen, sanctuary, and cafeteria. A person qualifies as a Free Eater if s/he hasn’t received a mess complaint in over 3 weeks and has been approved by School Meeting. Justice Committee may revoke your Free Eater status. The School Meeting Secretary keeps and updated list of SM approved Free Eaters.

6.12 Interior Doors
No one may lock interior doors. 

6.13 Use of the Stage
Any School Meeting member may reserve the stage for 30 minutes per day by writing their name on a sign-up sheet provided by the Attendance Clerk. During their time slot, the person who reserved the stage has total control over who is permitted to be on the stage with them and what they can do while they are there.

6.14 End of School Day Building Closure
The basement is closed at 3 PM and the upstairs is closed at 3:45 PM, except for people doing their chores in that part of the building. Staff are allowed to be upstairs and in the basement at any time.  

6.15 Front Door
No student may open the front door, unless 1.) they have been certified by the Office Clerk, or 2.) they are signed out and have said “Official Goodbye” with the intention to leave school for the day. 

6.16 Use of Cafeteria Tables 
The kitchen committee may designate two tables in the cafeteria that they can control. 

6.17 Shoes and Coat Storage
If you take off shoes, they must either go in your cubby, a shoe bin, or by the back door in the Red Room. If you remove your coat, it must go on a coat hook.

6.19 No toys in the hallways or on the stairs
No toys in the hallways or on the stairs. 

6.21 No Pets in the Building
No one can bring pets to school. 

6.22 Close Exterior Doors when it is Cold
If the outside temperature is below 65 degrees Fahrenheit, the exterior doors must be closed.

6.23 Excess Cubby Storage
All bags that do not fit in the cubbies must go on or in front of the radiator.

6.24 Messy Room Closure
Any School Meeting member may close a room. They must list the reasons for closing a room on the “closed” room sign. Unless they are cleaning the room, no one may enter a room that has been closed because of a mess. Only the Chore Clerk or the Building Clerk may open rooms closed because of a mess. Chore inspectors may enter closed rooms to check chores.

6.25 Red Room Art Supply Certification
All students using art supplies in the Red Room must be certified. 
	
6.26 No eating or drinking at the computers
No eating or drinking at the computers. 

6.27 Cleaning Supplies Usage
All school cleaning supplies are to be used for cleaning the school only. 

6.28 Basement Stereo Usage
You must be certified by Evan in order to use the new stereo on the basement stage. 

6.29 YouTube Usage
YouTube may only be used by those who can read. 

6.31 Eating in the Sanctuary
When you are eating in the Sanctuary, you may only eat at the tables on the first level of the sanctuary.  

6.32 Sticks in the Building
No sticks are allowed in the building. 

6.32 Projector Use
No one may use the projector unless certified by Chad. Upon certification, you may use the projector for no longer than 30 minutes per day. You may get special permission from Chad to use the projector for longer than 30 minutes a day. You must sign out the projector on a sheet created by the Building Clerk that includes time in and out and purpose of usage.

6.33 No climbing on the radiators
No climbing on the radiators. 

6.34 Moving Sanctuary Pews
No one may move the pews without Building Clerk approval.

6.36 Use of Stacked Chairs
No climbing or sitting on stacked chairs.

6.37 Chore Time Room Closure
Any School Meeting member may close a room for 10 minutes in order to complete his/her chore. No one may enter the room without the permission of the closer.

6.38 Exploratorium Materials
All materials found in the Exploratorium stay in the Exploratorium except for activities approved by the Math-Science Coop.

6.40 Blue Block Usage
No using sharp things while playing with the blue blocks. The blocks must stay in the Sanctuary. No one may play with or get inside the container for the blue blocks. The blue foam blocks are not exempt from any rule pertaining to safety or disrupting others’ play. No one can be written up for leaving a mess with the blue blocks. Also, if the blue blocks aren’t put away by 3:30 P.M., no one can use them the next day.”

6.41 Room Door Quiet Signs
If a room is being used by an activity that needs quiet and limited disruption, School Meeting members may hang a YELLOW card on the door. Anyone else can enter the room quietly. This can be used for up to 1 hour. If there is a yellow sign you cannot enter loudly and you cannot knock on door.

6.42 No Bedding from Home
No one can bring blankets or other bedding to school.

6.43 Work in Progress
A school meeting member can reserve a game or art project for 24 hours without being written up by using a “Work In Progress” sign with your name, time, and date.

6.44 Red Room Toys
All toys in the Red Room must stay in the Red Room.

6.46 Use of Off-Gassing Materials
When using materials that are made of off-gassing chemicals, you must ventilate the materials according to the instructions.

6.47 Exploratorium Room Reservation
A person wanting to use the Exploratorium for a group or quiet activity may interrupt computer use with a five minute warning. People using materials sanctioned by the robotics coop may use the computer for 2 hours to program projects. 

6.48 No Food on the Floor
You can’t put food, food containers, or food wrappers on the floor at any time.

6.49 Shoes on Couches
You can’t put your shoes on a couch.

6.50 Office Phone
You need to ask permission of a staff member in order to use the office phone. 

6.51 Minecraft Worlds
You cannot play on someone else’s Minecraft world without the creator’s permission.

6.52 Office Filing Drawer
Only Staff members are allowed access to the filing drawers in the office desk. 

6.53 Pink Room Wall Art Policy
School Meeting members may freely write or paint with art room materials limited to paint markers, acrylic paint, and markers on the walls of the Pink Room.

6.54 Dress-up Items
Dress-up items may not leave the basement

6.55 Front Lawn Policy

SMMs are allowed access to the front lawn of the school if the following conditions are met: 
* They have been certified to be on the front lawn. One loses certification for three weeks if charged with violating Rule 2.07 Running. 
* There is more than one person and at least one who is 11 or older. 
* A staff person is notified.
Front lawn rules: 
* All school rules apply, including the mess rule.
* There are absolutely no projectiles: sticks, balls, Frisbees, flying stuffies etc.
* Treat neighbors with the utmost respect and politeness. 
* If a stranger stops and is talking to students a lot, one person is to go inside and notify a staff member. 
* NO digging, unless it is sanctioned by the Gardening Co-op.
* Boundaries: 
o Inside edge of front sidewalk. 
o Top of hill by the big sign.
o Fence to the back yard. 
o You may not go in the window wells. 

Front Lawn Certification

The safety clerk or attendance clerk must certify SMM to be on the front lawn. Steps for certification are as follows: 1) Certifier checks to see if they have been charged with violating the 2.07 running rule in the past 3 three week. If they have they may not be certified until they past the 3 week mark.  1) Read the rules. 2) Be quizzed on the rules. 3) Sign the follow statement.

6.56 Food in Cubbies Overnight

No open food or opened unclean containers may be left in cubbies overnight.


Section 7: Clerkships, Committees, and Cooperatives

7.00 Committee and Cooperative Rules
You have to follow rules established by co-ops and committees.

7.01 Use of School Printers
School Clerks and members of School Meeting Committees and Co-ops have unlimited access to printing. All other people can only print 10 free pages per day.

7.02 Art Co-op Supplies
Art Co-op supplies must stay in the Art Room or Exploratorium. 

7.03 Coop Policy
* Definition: Cooperatives maintain space and materials at TRVS to the benefit of the members, and the school at large. Cooperatives will make good faith efforts for spaces, supplies and materials to be accessible for all SMM. Cooperatives are voluntary and have open membership to all school meeting members, but operate autonomously. 
* Organization: Cooperatives are democratically run by coop members. Positions are elected by members. 
* Meetings: Cooperatives must meet at least once per school year. If a cooperative goes an entire school year without meeting, the cooperative will be abolished by the SM Secretary. Cooperative members must attend two consecutive coop meetings to vote, excluding the first meeting of the school year.
* Elected positions: Cooperatives must elect a lead Organizer and Secretary. If needed, a treasurer may also be elected. Other positions specific to a cooperative may be elected at the cooperative's discretion. Frequency and nature of elections within cooperative is up to the discretion of each cooperative. One SM member may hold two or more elected positions within a cooperative.
o Organizer
* schedule and oversee all meetings
* maintain order in all meetings
* act as the public representative for the cooperative
o Secretary
* record and post minutes from all meetings
* maintain active membership lists
* post membership lists underneath the bulletin board outside of the kitchen
o Treasurer
* Keep records of all budget decision related to the corporation
* Membership: 
 To be a members of a Coop a SM must attend all meetings. Exceptions for attendance due to extenuating circumstances including but not limited to illness or absence from school during meetings are acceptable.
* Rules and Certifications: All rules and Certifications must be kept in the space of the coop as well as in the Coops folder on drop box.

7.04 Certification Policy

* Certifications are required for use of specific school equipment, materials, and areas, as well as to engage in certain school activities, as established by School Meeting.

* Only SM-appointed clerks and/or cooperatives, who preside over the particular school equipment, material(s), area(s), and/or activity that require certifications, can create and administer a certification.

* A certification must include the following:
1. A comprehensive list of rules including but not limited to, proper use, safety precautions, and general guidelines pertaining to the school equipment, material(s), area(s) and/or activity.
2. If applicable, the certification must also include the requirement to demonstration the ability to properly use any relevant equipment, materials, etc.
3. Corresponding questions (and answers) that are based on requirements (1) and (2).

* All rules established in a certification must be posted in either the rule book or the drop box of the responsible coop.

Section 8: Computers and Media

8.00 Computer Use during Justice Committee
If you are called to Justice Committee while you are on the computer and someone else takes your computer, you can use the same computer when you get back. 

8.01 Video games, TV, and movies
Video games played at school may not contain intense violence (graphic and realistic-looking depictions of physical conflict, such as extreme and/or realistic blood, gore, weapons, and depictions of human injury and death). The content in the game must comply with the excessive vulgarity rule.

With parental permission, School Meeting members may watch PG-13 or above rated videos.

School Meeting may exempt particular titles from this rule if they are to be viewed under special circumstances. 

8.02 Computer Sign-Up Contract 
TV, movies, and video games are allowed at this school (as long as they do not contain inappropriate content as described in our content rules) because they are important parts of the larger culture. We all need to learn how to enjoy them and how to regulate our use of them. In addition, computers are an extremely important tool in our society and it is good for students to become comfortable with them. 

In order to use the computers, you must be able to tell time. 

When you sign up for one of the school’s computers, you get it for 30 minutes. If someone is waiting for your computer, you have to give it up once you have used it for 30 minutes. You can “save” your computer for 5 minutes while you get up to do something else if you leave a note or tell someone to save it.

If you sign up for a “Computer Officer” shift, you need to work that shift. 

8.03 Use of office computers.
Official school business always takes precedence on office computers. No video gaming is allowed on office computers. 

8.04 Computer Headphones
The computer headphones have to stay with the computers. 

8.05 Computer Sign-In Sheet
Before using one of the school’s computers, you must sign in at the provided sign-in sheet. 

8.06 Media Landing Computer Headphones
Computers in the Media Landing can only be used with headphones.

8.07 Computer Time Limit Delay
If your allotted computer time limit has lapsed and someone asks for your computer, you have to wait 30 minutes before asking to use another occupied computer.

8.08 Art Room Computers
No playing games or watching movies on the Art Room computer.  


Section 9: School Meeting 

9.01 School Meeting Procedures

Meetings
Regular School Meetings are held on Wednesdays at 10:00am. No regular School Meeting extends beyond 12:00 pm except by special motion. Any regular School Meeting held outside of its normal time will require a quorum of 3 School Meeting members. 
Special School Meetings may be called at any time by the Chair or by 5 School Meeting members. A quorum of 3 School Meeting members is required for a Special School Meeting to take place. Such call must state the time, place and specific subject matter of the meeting and must be posted at least two hours before such a meeting on the main bulletin board. 
Agenda
The agenda shall include the date, time, and type of meeting (i.e., Regular or Special) and all matters of business known in advance, listed in the exact order in which they will be considered at the meeting, and under their correct headings as listed below. The Secretary shall generally present the agenda with the following order of business: 
• Approval of Agenda
• Approval of Minutes
• Announcements- Mandatory for all SMM.
• Reports of Officers, Officials, & Standing Committees (listing all officers, officials, & standing committees)
• Reports of Ad Hoc Committees or Special Committees (listing all ad hoc committees or special committees)
• Unfinished Business (Postponed motions)
• New Business 
• Open Agenda (If time allows)

The agenda may be changed by action of School Meeting.
A draft Agenda and a current proposal form for each regular session of School Meeting shall be posted on the School Meeting Bulletin Board no later than 24 hours after the close of the last regular session. The draft Agenda shall include at least the following: 
• Date, time, and place of meeting
• A list of all officials and committees subject to reporting to School Meeting
• Any unfinished business to be heard at the meeting
• Any previously submitted new business to be heard at the meeting
A final Agenda shall be published for each regular session of the School Meeting, and shall be posted no later than noon the day before the meeting.
Minutes
The School Meeting shall keep written Minutes of all sessions and proceedings. Minutes shall record the following: 
• Actions of the School Meeting
• Announcements and reports as submitted by School Meeting officials, committees, and corporations
• Other materials as directed by School Meeting or the Chair or at the Secretary's discretion.
The Secretary certifies that the Minutes are a true record by signature.
The Secretary shall post a paper copy of Minutes on the School Meeting bulletin board and a PDF copy to School Meeting's file sharing system within 24 hours of the meeting. The Secretary shall present Minutes to the School Meeting for approval, generally at the next regular session of the School Meeting.
Upon approval of Minutes by School Meeting, a copy shall be filed in the School Meeting Minutes notebook for the current year, and an electronic copy shall be saved in PDF format in a location on the school network designated by the Office Clerk.
Introduction & Consideration of Main Motions
Any School Meeting Member may submit business to School Meeting in the form of a main motion. New main motions are due, and shall be posted publicly, by 2 p.m. on the Monday prior to the opening of the session at which the discussion occurs, on the bulletin board space designated for official business.
Any motion that has satisfied public notice requirements may be introduced at the end of New Business if not otherwise included on the Agenda. Main motions introduced at the meeting that have not satisfied public notice requirements shall be included in the Minutes and shall also be included as New Business in the Agenda for the next regular session. 
Any motion which has no sponsor present at the School Meeting at the time it is to be discussed shall be automatically postponed to the next regular session and included on the Agenda for that meeting as New Business. Motions shall only be automatically postponed for lack of sponsor once.
Procedural & Special Rules
The School Meeting adopts Sturgis’ The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure, 4th Edition as the School Meeting's parliamentary authority except where rules listed in this document or the Rule Book are to the contrary.
School Meeting attendance is optional. There is no quorum for Regular or Special School Meetings.
Only School Meeting members may attend meetings held during school hours, unless invited by the School Meeting.
The School Meeting may require attendance of any member by a 3/4 vote.
Motions to expel shall be voted by ballot.
Motions passed by the School Meeting take effect on the day following the close of the session at which they are adopted, unless otherwise stated in the motion.
The Minutes of the previous meeting do not have to be read out loud at the meeting unless the Chair requests it.
No “seconds” are required.
Fees, Fines, & Funds
Committees, clerks, and corporations shall commit school funds and levy fees and fines only as authorized by School Meeting. All fees and fines collected under School Meeting authority are school funds. The following standing authority is hereby granted:
• Committees and clerks may commit school funds in fulfillment of their respective duties, not to exceed line item amounts in the annual budget adopted by the Board. 
• The Office Clerk may levy fees for photocopying, faxing, or private phone calls.
From time to time School Meeting may grant additional authority, exceptions, or restrictions.
Allegations of unauthorized levies and appropriations by committees, clerks, and corporations shall be heard by School Meeting, in the form of a motion or resolution, and shall not be heard by the Judicial Committee.
Requests for funds from the School Meeting must contain at least the following information:
• Who is making the request and who is to spend the money.
• The exact amount requested, or an upper ceiling, and when the money will be spent.
• What the money is to purchase, and who is to retain ownership of anything bought.
• Why there is a need for the expenditure and why it is a fair price.
Reports to the Board of Trustees
School Meeting Reports to the Board of Trustees shall be adopted by the School Meeting prior to presentation to the Board of Trustees.

9.02 Thursday School Meetings Policy
If there is no school on Wednesday, but there is school on Thursday, then School Meeting and Announcement Meeting will be held on Thursday.
9.03 Mandatory Meeting Chair Policy
The School Meeting Chair can train and elect School Meeting Members to run Announcements Section of School Meeting and Council Meetings. The chair of an announcements sections or council meeting will be selected at random from the pool of trained chairs.

9.04 Council Meeting Policy
Any two persons are needed in order to call a Council Meeting when they have a problem that needs to be addressed by the community. Council meetings will be run by the School Meeting Chair or by someone designated by the School Meeting Chair.

9.05 Charter Policy 

In order to begin a substantial project at school, one must first charter the project via the following process. The written charter must be approved by School Meeting before significant work on the project begins. 

No project that conflicts with the school’s bylaws will be approved. 

A chartered project must be typed and include a minimum of the following information: 1.) project objective, 2.) key results [or, scope]--Including responsibilities, steps, and outcomes, 3.) People involved [including a breakdown of roles if applicable], 4.) the cost, 5.) the schedule and/or date of completion, and 6.) the status of the project, if it involves multiple steps to be approved by school meeting.
Printed on 8/6/2014		  Rule Book       Page 1 of 3

